The abyss is a steep wall, reaching left and right for as long as anyone has ever travelled, up at least ten thousand levels from where I sit, and (in myth) down to the depths of Sheol, where the air burns, and
the face of the abyss wall melts and runs perpetually downward, into a molten infinity.  Standing on one of the switchbacked roads that men have scratched into the wall, looking out away from the wall, there is just darkness, fallers, and debris.  Down and out, an occasional red
glow from (one supposes) Sheol appears, but nothing else.  Sound from the abyss is (in the absence of passers-by) only an occasional sighing, as of distant winds, or very distant gales. Our scientists have determined that the light we see by, that wells in
the day and wanes in the night, comes from the rock of the wall, and the air itself near to the wall.  Why it waxes and wanes, and what force can cause the very air to give out with light, they cannot say.
Men's houses sit on the wall like the round, dusty hills of the spider's nests, clinging to the houses' walls.  Roads are hacked into the rock, winding switchbacked between the houses, through towns, narrow and crumbling in the wilderness.  Left to itself, the wall face is
irregular, bumpy, with long cracks and clefts, ledges leading to nowhere, chimneys and hollows. The general tendency of each level is to slope inward (toward the wall) at an angle comprising about one twentieth part of a circle from
the abyssward direction (the direction of the pull of gravity).  At the border between one level and the next, there is an overhang, so that the lowest parts of the upper level thrust outward into the void beyond the upper parts of the lower level, and in fact beyond the lower parts of
the lower level, so that although each level slopes wallward, the general tendency of the wall as a whole is to jut abyssward.  At least this is what the legend says, and the dim looming greyness we see looking up in the daytime, and the evidence of debris and fallers, supports it.
Passing from one level to the next lower is thus possible, although neither easily nor without danger, by the means of long ropes and pulleys or (if no assistance is to be had on the level below) by
swinging.  Travel in the opposite direction, from lower to higher levels, is on the other hand all but impossible in the normal course of things.  The rock of the border overhangs is tough and not subject to
cracks or fissures large enough to permit passage, yet has enough of a tendency to flake and chip near the point that all efforts to establish permanent bridges from this level to either of its neighbors have met
with (usually tragic) failure. Obvious, yes, but not so easy to do, given the amount of garbage there is to sift through. Starting around Halloween, that’s all that plays in continuous rotation at the mall, Starbucks, Bill O’Reilly’s dressing room, even the quick-change oil place down the street, for some reason. It’s inescapable. It’s no wonder people hate Christmas music.
But just as the spirit of Christmas exists apart from the annual orgy of consumerism that overtakes us like a bloodlust, the spirit of Christmas music isn’t to be found in yet another version of Winter Wonderland or the kind-of-rape-y Baby, It’s Cold Outside.
There’s plenty to love about Christmas music that doesn’t involve hoary standards worn thinner than Grandpa’s holiday tie, though even standards done well have a certain charm: Emmylou Harris singing The First Noel is spellbinding no matter how many times I hear it, and Paul Westerberg’s ramshackle version of Away in a Manger is perfect in its half-assed glory.
Apart from those, the Christmas songs I love fall into two categories. First, subversive novelty tunes that spoof the ridiculous parts of the holiday season: Monty Python’s Christmas in Heaven, or Nick Lowe’s Christmas at the Airport, or Big Freedia’s over-the-top new Christmas jam Make It Jingle, a paean to ostentatious gifts and lewd dance moves. Come to think of it, that one’s probably not satirical, but it’s fun in a way that Santa Baby hasn’t been since 1953.
Then there are the poignant, heart-on-sleeve songs, because who doesn’t like to wallow a bit every now and then? The Pogues’ Fairytale of New York, Jesse Malin’s Xmas and John Prine’s Christmas in Prison, to name a few, see past the tinsel and lights to the bittersweet side of the Christmas season. Tidings of joy are often undercut by darker themes: financial instability, hunger, more keenly missing absent loved ones. The sad-bastard songs remind me to be grateful for my own good fortune.
Christmas music also reminds me of my mom, who died two days before Christmas in 2002. She loved the holiday season, and I can’t remember a year when Harris’ Light of the Stable album wasn’t playing while she baked cookies and we decorated the tree. Even in leaner years, she never let on to us kids, or let it dim her enthusiasm. And she would have loved that Nick Lowe song.
Time is a boomerang, not an arrow. I was adopted by Pentecostals and stamped “Missionary”. Christmas was important in the missionary calendar. From the beginning of November, either we were preparing packages to send to the Foreign Field or we were preparing packages to deliver to those in Hot Places returning to the Home Front.
It might have been because my parents had been in the second world war. It might have been because we lived in End Time, waiting for Armageddon. Whatever the reason, there was a drill to Christmas, from making the mincemeat for the mince pies to singing carols to, or rather at, the unsaved of Accrington. Still, Mrs Winterson loved Christmas. It was the one time of the year when she went out into the world looking as though the world was more than a vale of tears.
She was an unhappy woman, and so this happy time in our house was precious. I am sure I love Christmas because she did.
On 21 December every year, my mother went out in her hat and coat while my father and I strung up the paper chains, made by me, from the corners of the parlour cornice to the centre light fitting.
Eventually my mother returned, in what seemed to be a hailstorm, though maybe that was her personal weather. She carried a goose, half-in, half-out of her shopping bag, its slack head hung sideways like a dream nobody can remember. She passed it to me – goose and dream – and I plucked the feathers into a bucket. We kept the feathers to restuff whatever needed restuffing, and we saved the thick goose fat drained from the bird for roasting potatoes through the winter. Apart from Mrs W, who had a thyroid problem, everyone we knew was as thin as a ferret. We needed goose fat.
After I had left home, and later gone to university at Oxford, I went back to the old house, that first Christmas-time. My mother had given me the ultimatum to leave home long since, when I fell in love with a girl, and in a religious house like ours I might as well have married a goat. We hadn’t spoken since. I had lived in a Mini for a bit, lodged with a teacher and eventually left town. During my first term at Oxford I received a postcard – one of those postcards that says post card in blue letters at the top. Underneath, in her immaculate copperplate handwriting was the message: “Are you coming home this Christmas? Love Mother”.
As I reached our little terrace house at the top of the street, I could hear the mostly musical sounds of what is best described as a bossa nova version of “In the Bleak Midwinter”. My mother had thrown out the old upright piano and got herself an electronic organ with double keyboard, orchestra stops, drum and bass.
She hadn’t seen me for two years. Nothing was said. We spent the next hour admiring the effects of snare drum and trumpet solo on “Hark! The Herald Angels Sing”.
My Oxford friend from St Lucia was due to visit me at home, which was brave of her, but when I had tried to explain about my family she thought I was exaggerating. At first the visit was a great success. Mrs W considered a black friend as a missionary endeavour all of its own. She went round to the retired missionaries from the church and asked: “What do they eat?” Pineapples, came the answer.
When Vicky arrived my mother gave her a wool blanket she had knitted so that Vicky would not be cold. “They feel the cold,” she told me.
Mrs Winterson was an obsessive and she had been knitting for Jesus all year. The Christmas tree had knitted decorations on it, and the dog was imprisoned inside a Christmas coat of red wool with white snowflakes. There was a knitted nativity scene, and the shepherds were wearing little scarves because this was Bethlehem on the bus route to Accrington.
My dad opened the door dressed in a knitted waistcoat and matching knitted tie. The whole house had been re-knitted.
Mrs W was in a merry mood. “Would you like some gammon and pineapple, Vicky? Cheese on toast with pineapple? Pineapples and cream? Pineapple upside-down cake? Pineapple fritters?” Eventually, after a few days of this fare, Vicky said: “I don’t like pineapple.”
Mrs W’s mood changed at once. She didn’t speak to us for the rest of the day and she crushed up a papier-mache robin. The next morning, at breakfast, the table was set with a pyramid of unopened tins of pineapple chunks and a Victorian postcard of two cats on their hind legs dressed up like Mr and Mrs. The caption said “Nobody loves us”.
That night, when Vicky went to bed, she found that her pillow had been removed and the pillowcase stuffed with warning leaflets about the Apocalypse. She wondered whether to go home, but I’d seen worse and I thought things might improve.
On Christmas Eve we had a group of carol singers round from the church. Mrs W did seem happier. She had forced me and Vicky to wrap several half-cabbages in tinfoil and spear them with cocktail sticks of cheddar cheese, topped with the rejected pineapple chunks.
She called these things sputniks. It was something to do with the cold war. Tinfoil? Antennae? The scaremongering that the KGB had listening devices hidden in cheese?
Never mind. The offending pineapples had found a purpose and we were all singing carols quite happily when there was a knock at the door. It turned out to be the Salvation Army, singing carols too.
This was reasonable. It was Christmas. But Mrs Winterson was having none of it. She opened the front door and shouted: “Jesus is here. Go away.”
When I went away after that Christmas I never went back. I never saw Mrs W again – she was soon too furious about my debut novel, Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit (1985). Quote: “It’s the first time I’ve had to order a book in a false name.”
As you get older you remember the dead at Christmas. The Celts, during their festival of Samhain, expected the dead to